=head1 NAME

virt-bmap - construct a map of disk blocks to files and display files accessed by a guest on boot

=head1 SUMMARY

 virt-bmap [-o bmap] [--format raw|qcow2|...] disk.img

 nbdkit -f bmaplogger file=disk.img [bmap=bmap] [logfile=logfile] \
     --run ' qemu-kvm -m 2048 -hda $nbd '

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Virt-bmap is two tools that help you to discover where files and other
objects are really located within a virtual machine disk image, and to
observe what files a virtual machine accesses when it boots.

=head2 virt-bmap: Construct block map from disk image

The C<virt-bmap> program takes a disk image, examines it looking for
files, directories, partitions and other significant features, and
constructs a block map of disk offsets to files.  Use it like this:

 virt-bmap --format raw disk.img

=head2 Output block map file

The output block map (default name: C<bmap>) is a simple text file
which maps disk ranges to files.

The mapping is not 1-1.  It is possible for multiple files to appear
to be mapped to a single disk range, or for disk ranges not to
correspond to any object.

 1 541400 544400 d /dev/sda1 /lost+found
 1 941000 941400 f /dev/sda1 /.vmlinuz-3.11.10-301.fc20.x86_64.hmac
 1 941400 961800 f /dev/sda1 /config-3.11.10-301.fc20.x86_64
 1 961800 995400 f /dev/sda1 /initrd-plymouth.img

The first four columns are:

=over 4

=item *

the disk image index (always C<1> in the current implementation),

=item *

the starting byte offset,

=item *

the ending byte offset + 1

=item *

the object type:

=over 4

=item C<'d'>

directory

=item C<'f'>

file

=item C<'p'>

partition

=item C<'lvm_lv'>

logical volume

=back

=back

The following column(s) identify the file or object.

=head2 bmaplogger: nbdkit plugin to observe file accesses

The second tool is an L<nbdkit(1)> plugin called C<bmaplogger>.  Use
this in conjunction with "captive nbdkit" (see L<nbdkit(1)>) to
observe the files accessed by a virtual machine when booting:

 nbdkit -f bmaplogger file=disk.img bmap=bmap \
     --run ' qemu-kvm -m 2048 -hda $nbd '

=head1 VIRT-BMAP OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-f> raw|qcow|...

=item B<--format> raw|qcow|...

Set the format of the input disk image.  The default is C<raw>.

Note this is I<not> auto-detected, you I<have to> specify the
correct format.

=item B<--help>

Display brief help message and exit.

=item B<-o> FILENAME

=item B<--output> FILENAME

Write the output (block map) to the named file.  The default is a file
called C<bmap> in the current directory.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=back

=head1 BMAPLOGGER OPTIONS

This section documents the bmaplogger plugin options.  For general
nbdkit options see L<nbdkit(1)>.

=over 4

=item B<file=>disk.img

(Required)

The disk image.

=item B<bmap=>BMAP

(Optional: defaults to C<bmap>)

The block map, previously prepared using C<virt-bmap>, and
corresponding to the same disk image specified in C<file=...>

=item B<logfile=>FILENAME

(Optional: defaults to stdout)

Send the log output to a file.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<http://www.redhat.com/mailman/listinfo/virt-tools-list>

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones <rjones @ redhat . com>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

(C) Copyright 2014 Red Hat Inc.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
